[MUSIC]
Data is a collection of facts in the form of words, numbers, or even pictures,
data is one of the most critical assets of any business, it is used and
collected practically everywhere.
Your bank stores data about you, your name, address, phone number,
account numbers, etcetera.
Your credit card company and your PayPal accounts also store data about you.
Data is important, so it needs to be secure and it needs to be stored and
accessed quickly, the answer is a database, so what is a database?
A database is a collection of data or information designed for the input,
storage, search and retrieval and modification of data.
And a database management system, or DBMS,
is a set of programs that creates and maintains the database.
It allows you to store, modify and
extract information from the database using a function called querying.
For example, if you want to find customers who have been inactive for six months or
more using the querying function.
The database management system will retrieve data of all customers from
the database that have been inactive for six months or more.
Even though a database and DBMS mean different things,
the terms are often used interchangeably.
There are different types of databases.
Several factors influence the choice of database, such as the data type and
structure, querying mechanisms, latency requirements,
transaction speeds, and intended use of the data.
It's important to mention two main types of databases here relational and
non-relational databases.
Relational databases, also referred to as RDBMSs,
build on the organizational principles of flat files,
with data organized into a tabular format with rows and columns.
Following a well-defined structure and schema, however,
unlike flat files, RDBMSs are optimized for data operations and
querying involving many tables and much larger data volumes.
Structured query language, or SQL,
is the standard querying language for relational databases.
Then we have non-relational databases, also known as NoSQL, or not only SQL.
Non-relational databases emerged in response to the volume, diversity and
speed at which data is being generated today.
Mainly influenced by advances in cloud computing, the internet of things, and
social media proliferation.
Built for speed, flexibility and scale,
non-relational databases made it possible to store data in a schema-less or
free form fashion, NoSQL is widely used for processing big data.
[MUSIC]